In the early 1710s, and intermittently thereafter, the Cavan clergyman John Richardson attempted to mobilise the resources of the Protestant Ascendancy behind a systematic campaign of evangelisation through Irish. His ultimate failure in parliament and convocation is a familiar episode that tends to colour modern evaluations. This article considers Richardson’s project within its more immediate chronological and spatial context, arguing that changes in the social and demographic structures of southern Ulster after the Jacobite war offered an apparent (if fleeting) opportunity for religious engineering.


The aim of this paper is to introduce a hitherto un-acknowledged incidence of British parliamentary intervention in Gardiner’s Relief Act (1778) in Ireland and to demonstrate how subscription-list analysis can be used as a tool to convey a political message. The central focus of this paper is the unparalleled appearance of twenty members of Britain’s governing political elite supporting via subscription A General History of Ireland, a polemical work by the Irish-Catholic antiquarian Sylvester O’Halloran published in London in June 1778. This paper will argue that the unprecedented appearance of a British political coterie in the subscription-list of this work was a deliberate intervention to encourage the passage of Gardiner’s Relief Act in Ireland by demonstrating British parliamentary support for the measure via O’Halloran’s subscription-list, and moreover, that the orchestration of this list took place within the imperial corridors of power.


Swift often noted his aversion to coffee-house conversation and to tavern talk, to gossip and company, and to being buried in Dublin in the years of his Deanship. Yet the popular myth of a morose, unsociable Swift belies both his engagement with various literary and political clubs in his early career and his participation in collaborative and experimental poetic games in his Dublin circles. This essay considers Swift’s involvement with three clubs in London (the Saturday Club, the Brothers’ Club, and the Scriblerians) and his writings on a number of fictional clubs (the Athenian Society, the Calves-Head Club, and a putative Society for the correction of the English language). While Swift wrote very little of his experience of actual clubs, the latter three, in addition to the Scriblerian Club as imagined, rather than actual clubs, resulted in a number of defining poems and works in his career. When Swift settled in Dublin, poetry written and exchanged in a number of sociable circles characterised much of his published verse and gave glimpses of the circles and informal clubs which he formed among friends there. Although these poems are often dismissed as ‘trifles’, the essay argues that the poems are crucial for our understandings of ‘conversational culture’ or sociability in Swift’s Dublin.


The language of ‘interest’ was a key feature in 1720-21 debates about an Irish national bank, as it was in the wider British and trans-Atlantic context. In the pamphlet literature, multiple meanings of ‘interest’ were leveraged to analyze the impact of the proposed bank on the balance of power between England and Ireland, Irish Protestants and Catholics, and the merchant/financial and landed classes. The intersecting registers of ‘interest’ allowed these political, economic and social concerns to be related to one overarching concern: the good of Ireland. This semantic multiplicity was deployed as a rhetorical strategy to express divergent opinions on the policies that would best promote the nation’s welfare. The bank debate was thus an important context for the articulation and dissemination of economic welfare as a central element of Irish patriot discourse The deployment of the various meanings of ‘interest’ also reveals how traditions of English political thought were appropriated and leveraged in the development of early Irish national identity.


This article refers to blood-drinking of a loved one in the Irish Gaelic Tradition. The motivation for the article was a need to collect the many references to the ritual drinking of human blood in Ireland in one place and examine them in detail. This paper argues that as part of the death rituals associated with keening the dead, and especially if the deceased was a male hero, the drinking of blood was meaningful as an expression of the intensity of grief felt by the female mourners. This article discusses examples of blood-drinking in oral lament poetry from Middle Irish to the modern day, usually by the foster mother, mother, wife or sister of the dead man. It is commonly though not exclusively a woman who praises the dead man in poetry. However, an example from 2011 where a male Irish traveller discusses the death of his son will be studied here for the first time (to my knowledge). This paper also discusses the motif in the eighteenth-century oral composition Caoineadh Airt Ui' Laoghaire. Blood-drinking was not merely a figure of speech or a literary trope in the Irish oral lament. The caoineadh provided an important psychological function as the community returned to normality after the loss of a local hero. The mixing of blood created an everlasting bond between the mourner and the deceased after death. The conclusion is that the native Irish caoineadh and the presentation of the actions of the bereaved, including blood-drinking, formed part of a dramatic performance. The occurrence of blooddrinking in the twenty-first century demonstrates its significance in the Irish ritual of lamenting the dead.


This article uses recent scholarship on literary coteries to re-examine Swift’s ‘Triumfeminate’, the Dublin circle of women writers active between 1724 and 1734 that included Laetitia Pilkington, Constantia Grierson, Mary Barber and, occasionally, Elizabeth Sican. The contradictory epithets which Swift’s friends applied to this circle, such as ‘female senate’ and ‘constant seraglio’, point to the complex, malleable and indeterminate spaces that characterise female literary coteries. The rivalry between Barber and Pilkington, both seeking professional status through print culture, coalesced around their respective attempts to appropriate the memory of the scholarly and pious Constantia Grierson, who died young, by publishing her manuscript poems in their own printed works and using her friendship to posthumously validate their own reputations. I will argue that a larger picture of the ‘Senatus Consultum’ (the epithet used by Pilkington of the circle) needs to address not only its female dynamics, but the complex interrelationship between its female writers and male members, mentors, and models such as Swift, Patrick Delany, and Matthew Pilkington.


Literary sociability flourished in eighteenth-century Ireland and encompassed reading parties, private theatricals, book clubs, coteries, and literary salons. Such gatherings and related intellectual pursuits were not confined to the capital, and the papers of those attached to the grand houses of the Irish midlands reveal figures interested in scholarly endeavours and cultural exchange, as well as other aspects of elite sociability. The letters circulated between Castle Forbes and Edgeworthstown House in County Longford, and Charleville Forest in King’s County (now County Offaly) enable us to appreciate the different elements of literary associational life unfolding in the Irish midlands in the late-eighteenth and early-nineteenth centuries and the various relationships formed there. They allow a new perspective on Maria Edge worth’s own literary criticism and her participation in associational life. The correspondence between these country houses also allows us to appreciate how literary sociability and intellectual pursuits were sustained through family connections, literary correspondence, and an intense circulation of books and manuscript material. The article demonstrates that both the development of women’s intellectual activity and Ireland’s participation in Enlightenment forms of associational life could take place beyond Dublin.


This article explores how the Fitzwilliam family’s great Dublin estate was designed and laid out in the period 1725-71. Successive Viscounts Fitzwilliam were unusual in that they employed Catholic agents and actively permitted Catholic tenants on their estate. They also colluded with their Catholic tenants to provide them with as much security of tenure as possible, and allowed their Catholic agents the added subterfuge of subletting some properties and of developing others. When combined with the maps and surveys produced for transmission to London, the correspondence partly reveals what constrained and encouraged Catholic investment in land and property at the height of the penal laws in eighteenth-century Dublin. During this period Catholics and Dissenters were not permitted by law to take leases longer than 31 years and ‘discoverers’ (people who betrayed any illegality to the authorities) were common, benefiting personally from betraying their neighbour. Complex legal strategies, such as collusive discovery, sought to make the identification of the true holder of the land progressively more difficult. The straightforward expression of authorship and patronage, so essential for determining architectural motive and design intent, becomes muddied and concealed by these dissimulating practices of ownership and counter-ownership. The design impact of such complex legal stratgies is a substantially unexplored aspect of Irish architectural and landscape history. The analysis presented is source-led, interdisciplinary and frequently suggestive rather than definitive but aims to reveal a hidden landscape of discovery, Catholic agency and egalitarian suburban space.


In 1698, William Penn, the Quaker preacher, writer and founder of Pennsylvania, travelled to Ireland to tend to his county Cork estates and to participate in a missionary tour of the country. Shortly after his arrival in Dublin, Penn was attacked in print by an obscure Baptist named John Plimpton, sparking off a short-lived pamphlet debate. By introducing new evidence that sheds light on some of the ‘lost’ contributions to this debate, this article clarifies the origins, chronology, and geographical scope of the 1698 pamphlet exchange between Penn and Plimpton.


This article examines the economic writing of Jonathan Swift as a counter to the dominant mercantilist theories of contemporary English economic literature and policy. It is argued that Swift promotes an alternative set of policies that advance Ireland’s growth through local consumption, production, and development rather than through external trade. Instead of pursuing mercantilist goals of a positive balance of trade, bullion, and military power, Swift encourages Ireland to pursue demand-driven growth. Swift’s diagnoses of Ireland’s problems and his proposed solutions, especially regarding money and consumption, offer possibilities for economic action more appropriate for Ireland’s situation than the standard mercantilist beliefs and policies. It is also demonstrated that Swift’s policy prescriptions are based on a consistent economic philosophy that focuses on improvements in the quality of life of Irish households rather than the accumulation of financial and military power.


Eoghan Rua 6 Suilleabhain is known as a Jacobite poet, a careful scribe, a tutor and migrant worker. Based on the textual evidence in five of his ‘aisling’ compositions, it may be posited that the poet spent a period of time abroad. Those poems are ‘Ar maidin inne cois ce na slimbharc’, ‘Ceo draiochta’, ‘I Sacsaibh na sead’, ‘Cois taoide maidean greine’ and ‘Ar mo thaisteal la fomhair’, respectively. The poems reveal the significant influence his time in England had on 6 Suilleabhain and how it left its mark on his poetic output.


This article examines what was on the shelves of the medical marketplace in early eighteenth-century Dublin. It does so by analysing the medical cohort in twenty-one auction and sales catalogues, printed in Dublin between 1695 and 1740. It explores this cohort from a number of perspectives: subject, format and language, and in so doing, argues that the Dublin booksellers of the early eighteenth century sought to respond to two growing medical markets: the lay vernacular market, which favoured therapeutic texts in English, and a learned medical market which preferred the costly Latin opera omnia of well-known physicians. An examination of the output of individual bookselling firms suggests that specialization was taking place in the medical marketplace of early eighteenth-century Dublin. In an appendix it provides, for the first time, a full listing of the extant auction catalogues for the period, with the location of original copies.


This essay takes as its focus a poetry miscellany printed in Waterford in 1772: Select Poems, designed for the improvement and amusement of young ladies. By Miss Carter and others. The collection is notable in a number of respects. It preceded the first Dublin edition of Carter’s poetry (1777); offered a new, and unique, selection of her poetry; and identified a specifically young female audience for her work. In the mid-eighteenth century, Carter’s translation of the works of Epictetus had made her famous in both Britain and Ireland, although her specific links with Ireland would become better known only in the late 1770s, with poems concerning the Dawson and Vesey families added to editions of her poetry after 1776. The Waterford collection is thus set in the context of the reception of the Bluestockings in Ireland in order to explore the phenomenon of the famously-learned lady as it was received and disseminated in eighteenth-century Ireland.


This article considers Maria Edgeworth’s unpublished 1799 essay advocating mass education in Ireland in relation to her tales for children published in the immediate aftermath of the 1798 uprising. For Edgeworth, the education of the poor, granting wider access to print culture and enabling the free circulation of ideas, promised the emergence of a new political nation without violent revolution. Through the creation of a reading public, Edgeworth sought a solution to conflict. Her writing for and about children post-1798 propagates a culture of book-reading, thinking, and invention, and was an extension of her commitment to mass education. The child characters who populate Edgeworth’s tales may be read allegorically as representatives of an Irish adult working class that had been infantilized and subjected to unjust repression, but rather than enjoining submission to adult authority, Edgeworth makes heroes of her inventive and resilient child protagonists, imagining through them alternative futures for the Irish nation.


This essay argues that Practical Education, or, The History of Harry and Lucy, published for private circulation within the Edgeworth family and a small group of acquaintances in 1780, was written by Honora Sneyd Edgeworth. Further, the argument is that Richard Lovell Edgeworth later revised this early story passed it onto Maria, who published it as the first part of Early Lessons (1801). The complicated composition, revision and publication history of this innovative children’s story highlights the collaborative nature of the Edgeworths’ production of children’s stories over a period of several years. In particular, that history reveals the importance of the family for female participation in Romantic literary culture. Nevertheless, familial collaboration effectively masked the identity of the actual author of the first Harry and Lucy story for over two centuries, and so precluded due recognition of the innovativeness of Honora Sneyd Edgeworth’s contribution to children’s literature.


This paper considers George Berkeley’s (1685–1753) exclusive and limited conception of toleration for Catholics in the 1730s and how his views fit with those of other advocates of toleration in Ireland at the time by looking at sermons preached by Edward Synge (1690–1762) the younger and John Abernethy (1680–1740). In his early years of service as a bishop of Cloyne, Berkeley drew a distinction between what he called ‘mere Papists’ and ‘Recusants’ and proposed that political toleration only be extended to the former. This corresponded with the idea of freedom of conscience suggested by both Synge (in 1725) and Abernethy (in 1735). Due to their obedience to the Pope in Rome, Berkeley thought that Recusants posed a threat to Hanoverian power in Ireland – at least up to the year of 1745. At the same time, like Synge and Abernethy, ‘the tolerant Berkeley’ argued that Catholics should be persuaded, rather than forced, to convert to the true religion. This was in keeping with his life’s mission of bringing man closer to God.


After eliminating a developmental writing course and creating an accelerated "Studio" composition course for basic writers, I investigated these students’ needs (uninterrupted time, quiet spaces, social support, and academic help) and the resources that met those needs. Qualitative analysis of interviews with forty-nine students demonstrated that successful students were able to draw upon more resources, including time, space, and social support, than unsuccessful students, who ran short. I theorize, using terms developed by Deborah Brandt, that the literacy of the less successful students was not fully subsidized. These results support basic writing course models that integrate academic, affective, and social support into classroom work.


This essay considers the critical need for pre-service and in-service basic writing faculty to define and enact a professional identity, specifically within the context of faculty development and graduate course settings. The essay describes a graduate course in teaching basic writing offered primarily online with four in-person weekend workshops. As a result, the course has faculty development implications. Key features of the class are professional mentoring through participation in the Council on Basic Writing discussion list, which offers visibility for students as emerging basic writing professionals; creation of Composition Frequently Asked Questions wiki material on basic writing, which serves as a kind of intermediary “publication”; and encouragement to present at conferences and submit manuscripts. The essay also explores the issue of faculty development generally for emerging and current basic writing professionals who are often working as contingent faculty and asks how a professional identity can be developed given these realities.


The author argues that significant progress in destigmatizing basic writing courses and students can be achieved by allowing students to make choices not only about which First-Year Writing (FYW) course best suits their needs through directed self-placement (DSP) but also by offering a variety of course options, including corequisite courses that carry full graduation credit. Drawing from experiences at the author's institution, the article illustrates how certain fortunate circumstances enabled a reconsideration and reframing of FYW curricular offerings and placement methods.
The article concludes with an examination of the unique challenges involved in fully implementing universal choice and provides several examples of how this approach continues to present unforeseen local opportunities for destigmatizing "basic writing."


This article explores the pedagogical implications of translingualism by offering writing theory cartoon as a pedagogical tool to support basic writers’ development of translingual dispositions. In a curriculum that challenges the supremacy of standard English over other languages and modalities, this assignment supports basic, multilingual writers’ representation of and inquiry into their own language practices. Drawing on analysis of interviews, student-generated writing theory cartoons, and written reflections, I discuss how such a pedagogical approach shifts our attention away from textual evidence of translanguaging to surfacing basic writers’ struggles and triumphs in negotiating linguistic, rhetorical and cultural differences, thereby complicating our understanding of translingualism.


Scholars such as Diane Kelly-Riley and Patricia Bizzell have argued that the student writing feature most likely to place a student into a basic writing course is the presence of a dialect other than standard academic English. This essay examines how assessment practices can foster students’ diverse languages rather than inhibit them. I conducted a semester-long participant observation of two sections of first-year writing at Midwestern University, also considered basic writing preparatory courses, in order to examine how instructors assess varieties of English. One of these sections exclusively enrolled nonnative speakers of English; the other section enrolled both native and nonnative speakers. 
A key finding is that students modeled the vocabulary they used to discuss their writing and the writing of their peers to match the assessment language used by the program. Composition scholarship recognizes that language difference and variation are intrinsic to all language; thus, programs should take care to consider issues of language diversity when designing rubrics or other assessment tools to avoid unfairly penalizing students. I discuss one possible model for increased attention to language diversity in assessment.


The Dada and Surrealist movements are known for producing work that challenges reader-viewers’ perceptions of reality. These movements also prompted creators to experiment with unexpected mediums and materials, and this can be seen through the intersection of visual art and writing. This essay emphasizes the importance of an interdisciplinary approach to the teaching of Basic Writing and proposes an approach that uses the tenets of Dada and Surrealism as starting points for enacting an arts-based, transgenre pedagogy. Focusing on three Basic Writing courses as case studies, the essay explores the benefits of this arts-based pedagogical approach and assignments that require students to engage in art-making and writing simultaneously.


This article argues for the significance of designing writing placement procedures that embrace linguistic diversity within community colleges. Utilizing data on community college writing programs and student demographics from an urban community college, it scrutinizes the prevailing structures of ESL and developmental writing programs at two-year institutions and identifies potential issues with existing models. Furthermore, the article advocates for a translingual approach to writing placement, especially in community colleges with heterogeneous student populations. Such an approach recognizes the intricacies of language use and prioritizes student agency throughout the placement process.


This article argues that the national trend towards replacing developmental writing programs with mainstreaming and corequisite courses presents a significant opportunity to reconsider writing goals and assessment practices for all students. This insight is partially derived from data collected over multiple semesters at one community college, revealing that mainstreamed students in an accelerated learning program often outperform non-developmental students when assessed by the same measure.
These findings raise questions not only about placement procedures but also about prior assessment practices that had mandated more rigorous writing assessments for developmental students compared to those deemed "prepared" for college-level writing. By providing a historical overview of shifting assessment practices at one institution, this article aims to demonstrate how the blurring of distinctions between "developmental" and "regular" writers, stemming from recent mainstreaming efforts, can prompt a constructive reassessment of writing assessment for all students.


This essay, in letter form, introduces graduate-level study in Basic Writing to practicum students. It situates teaching practices within Basic Writing histories and pedagogies, and invites readers to focus widely, read deeply, and keep writing. Included are lessons from Bernstein’s experiences in presenting David Bowie’s artistic and cultural contributions, reading James Baldwin, addressing racial literacy, and becoming a neurodiverse writer and teacher of Basic Writing.

Native Americans are largely absent from the basic writing literature, yet their experiences and identity construction as emerging academic writers offer important insights for college writing instructors. This study addresses previous research on Native American college writers, the legacy of education and writing in Native communities, and the role of cultural identity and the connection between self and writing. Semi-structured interviews were conducted with 20 students who identified as American Indian or Alaska Native enrolled at a public university and two tribal colleges. To generate discussion around writing identity and experiences, participants were asked to draw portraits depicting themselves as academic writers. Six themes emerged as representative of students’ identities as writers. Findings also highlight the influence of culture and community on writing perception, which are triangulated with results from semi-structured interviews with faculty and staff. Recommendations are provided for integrating Indigenous literacies into college composition curricula.




At a four-year public comprehensive university in 2017, a mandated attempt to implement a corequisite model for Basic Writing education challenged assumptions about the types of students enrolled in the existing program. Students, who by institutional placement measures (ACT scores) would be placed in First-Year Writing, were voluntarily enrolling in Basic Writing courses despite administrative assumptions that they did not need the course.
Additionally, I found that students who took AP English and Dual-Credit in high school were also enrolled in Basic Writing. Findings from three years of survey data from students (enrolled in both prerequisite courses and corequisite courses) and institutional data indicate programs need to revise curriculum and placement practices to meet the needs of the students enrolled, rather than the needs of the hypothetical deficient writers institutions presume enroll.


This article writes the histories of CUNY Open Admissions and hiphop toward each other, illuminating both. Bringing Open Admissions to bear on hiphop history helps us see that, while historians locate the birth of hiphop culture in a 1970s New York gutted by divestment and displacement, in fact the decade before hiphop’s birth was characterized by a flourishing Black and Puerto Rican arts scene in New York and the radical education of tens of thousands of students of color in the CUNY system. Revisiting the archives of Open Admissions with a hiphop lens draws attention to the cultural rhetorics education being taught in remedial writing classrooms by adjunct lecturers like June Jordan, Adrienne Rich, and others, who drew students’ attention and inquiry to their own communities and language practices.
Looking at a selection of documents chosen for their use of the term “rappin,” including teachers’ reflective writing, administrative documents, and community writing, this article argues that, as bureaucratic language evolved to disguise racism in the 1960s and 1970s, a resistive, identity-based language of rappin evolved in response. Ultimately, hiphop language only entered the commodity market at the end of the 1970s when CUNY instituted tuition for the first time in its history, pushing out many of the students Open Admissions had been designed to welcome in.
Archaeological investigations of four Acadian settlements have revealed a curiously high number of pairs of sewing and embroidery scissors present at the homesteads. This article examines those artifacts and finds that the high ratio of fine-work tools and the decorative nature of many of the examples reveal a cultural interest in embroidery and embellishment, and a connection to changing European conceptions of genteel feminine accomplishment.
These status signals read differently in the Acadian settlement context, which may in turn have contributed to outside observers’ impressions of the Acadians as indolent and without respect for the structure of colonial authority.


In 1839, in the British North American colony of Prince Edward Island, Tom Williams, a Mi’kmaw man, was convicted of murdering another Mi’kmaw man, Joe Louis, and sentenced to hang. Williams, however, did not hang. This article suggests possible reasons the colonial government chose to commute Williams’s sentence, linking the case to the dispossession of the Mi’kmaq and their subsequent marginalization by settler society as well as the “land question” then dominating the Island.
The case epitomizes the ascendancy of British colonial law and the concurrent weakening of Mi’kmaw law in the colony.


In 1890, the Newfoundland government held an essay contest to solicit opinions on how best to reform its education system. There was widespread acknowledgement that the system was failing to provide a quality education for the colony’s children. The threat to churches’ control over schools led Irish Catholic Christian Brother John Slattery to enter the essay contest. Slattery was victorious, though his win was dubious. He proposed a church-led conservative approach to educational reform, which led to the rise of a cooperative denominational paradigm that entrenched church control over schooling in Newfoundland and Labrador for more a century.


Graham Creighton High School served as a pilot project for integration in the relatively
isolated Eastern Shore area of the County of Halifax, Nova Scotia. The school, located in
Cherry Brook, opened as an integrated institution in 1964 and served as the space where
students from the surrounding Black and adjacent white communities were brought
together to adhere to the local school board’s policy of integration. But while integration
was the board’s policy, it was often not implemented in practice.

The article looks at Chinese immigrants in Newfoundland, focusing on the restaurants
they opened in St. John’s from 1918 through the mid-1940s. For the Chinese immigrants,
restaurants were paths to economic stability and, for some, a way to establish themselves
as respected members of the community. The restaurants were, however, also contested
spaces, as civil authorities, drawing on racial, gendered, and class-based assumptions,
saw them – and the social interactions taking place within them – as threatening to the
moral order. This history of Chinese immigrants and their restaurants offers a diverse and
complex urban history of St. John’s.


Since the 1960s, there has been a shift in commemoration and museum studies away
from settler-only narratives and towards institutional inclusion of Indigenous and Black
perspectives. While some critics have condemned institutional misuse of decolonization
and diversity, in Nova Scotia there has been meaningful engagement with Black and
Indigenous creators and their communities in the province’s institutions and public spaces.
This is evidenced by the hiring of Indigenous and Black commemoration professionals,
the creation of exhibits and museums/centres that focus on these perspectives, and the
ongoing reclamation of public spaces such as parks, streets, and buildings.


This article focuses on Canadian Mina Hubbard’s expedition through the Labrador-Ungava
Peninsula in 1905. In so doing, it examines the notion of the northern non-Indigenous
explorer/traveller as witness. It considers two practices that were essential to Hubbard in
the construction and performance of her identity as an explorer: empirical observation
and authorship. Hubbard’s efforts to present herself as a reliable northern witness, in
contest with her wilderness guides, also highlight the kinds of racialized, classed, and
gendered identities that were excluded from the work of northern exploration around
the turn of the century.


This piece examines the narrativization of the scars on Prince's back to read a narrative of an alternative humanism, that teaches us out of dispossession as ethics. Sylvia Wynter has argued that under the Western bourgeois order gender and race are a "function of genre." In showing the scars on her back to the culture that produced them, Prince disrupts these genres and no longer remains (only) subject to the white power around her but a maker of alternative and extrinsic narratives about blackness and being that we might read if we wish to do so.


Treatment of European and African hair radically differed in the time of slavery: the former sentimentally preserved in mourning jewelry and keepsakes, the latter shaved off in preparation for the slave-ship hold. This essay considers some examples of how hair functioned as a racial marker. While hair texture was used to establish boundaries between races, hair styling emerged a site of racial contamination where these boundaries threatened to dissolve as white people "frizzled" their hair to make it curly, while Black people shaped their Afro hair so as to mimic the aristocratic hairstyles of white Europeans.


This reflective essay is a report on the series of virtual dialogues on Race, Blackness, and Romanticism I convened as a 2020-2021 Center for Diversity Innovation Distinguished Visiting Scholar. It offers an overview of my discussion with the following: Simon Gikandi and Lisa Lowe, Peter Brathwaite and Paterson Joseph, Christienna Fryar and Jessica Marie Johnson, and Marcos Gonsalez and Travis Chi Wing Lau.


This essay explains why The Woman of Colour cannot assimilate Olivia Fairfield into Romantic-era marriage: a black matriline and Jamaican upbringing imbue the heroine's abolitionism with a racial consciousness white women could not claim. Such an articulate criticism, while necessary for the novel's anti-slavery stance, is at odds with its domestic ideology, which requires instead the translucent, dependent figure of Angelina as the ideal wife. By setting up such a contrast of feminine subjectivities, the novel aligns a global feminist consciousness with women of color rather than the dependent white women associated with British marriage.


I retrace Anne Sancho's creative life in letters through the legacy of her husband, Ignatius Sancho, and the production history of Paterson Joseph's play, Sancho: An Act of Remembrance. An earlier version of the play features an epilogue centered on Anne, but recent productions replaced the epilogue with a commemoration of her husband's historic vote. I consider the erasure of Anne from productions of Sancho in relation to historical framings centered on nationally-bounded stories of inclusion and bourgeois individualism. Anne's presence-absence unsettles these framings and, at the same time, insists that we confront how the U.S. imperial present conjures the British imperial past.


This article explores how burgeoning progressive thinking about racial equality at the turn of the nineteenth century transformed into renewed racism and anti-blackness as the British abolition movement won success. It argues that the evolution of black characters over the nineteenth century, the etymology of arguably the most infamous of racial epithets, and the emergence of the term "white supremacy" during the Romantic period offers a window into how literature and language worked with and contributed to anti-blackness.


Black digital humanities, or Black DH, is less an easily defined field and more a practice or a call to study: how we read, how we think, and how and why we become invested in supporting the ongoing anti-Black systems of the world. In this article, longtime Black DH collaborators Liz Murice Alexander and Kimberly Bain reflect on Black DH's conscientiousmissuses of technology and traditional technoculture. They move from Samuel Delany's Afrofuturist formulations to Alexander's myweakframe digital essay project to think through the work of building new worlds: new spaces, new archives, new collectives for Black thought.


This essay introduces the roundtable on Daniel O’Quinn’s Engaging the Ottoman Empire and briefly discusses the book’s contributions to British imperial history.


In Engaging the Ottoman Empire: Vexed Mediations, 1690–1815, Daniel O’Quinn uses microhistorical methods to construct a constellatory, rather than a cumulative, history of intercultural communication and representation between Ottomans and Europeans. By reducing the scale of his analysis to a singular event, individual, object, or place, he identifies unexpected moments of dissonance, instances of something that does not quite fit. Carlo Ginzburg and Giovanni Levi, both early practitioners of microhistory, called such observations “clues” and used them to complicate grand historical narratives, such as the emergence of modernity. This study proposes that O’Quinn methodologically innovates the use of microhistory by mapping his observations about Ottoman-European intercultural communication in a constellatory field in which each “clue” operates as a dynamic discursive node with many spatial and temporal connections. Throughout his book, he guides readers through this unwieldy spatiotemporal field, from one microhistorical node to the next, and thus models a new approach to tracing the historical and imagined itineraries that linked Europeans and Ottomans across the long eighteenth century.


This essay offers a short reflection on Daniel O’Quinn’s Engaging the Ottoman Empire: Vexed Mediations, 1690–1815. It attends to the forms of historical consciousness that O’Quinn traces within the Society of Dilettanti’s sponsored voyage of William Pars, Nicholas Revett, and Richard Chandler to Asia Minor from 1764–66.


This paper reads Christopher Smart’s Jubilate Agno as a “stuplime” forerunner to experimental poetry, arguing that theories and problems surrounding the avant-garde can help us situate the text as operating somewhere between an archive and a poem. I argue that Jubilate Agno, like many twenty-first-century experimental poems, is an archival project, and Smart’s mechanical ciphers, citations, translations, wordplay, and repetition are formal choices deployed to transcribe natural histories and encyclopedias. This mechanical ciphering strains a reader’s ability to attend to the literal information that Smart transcribes, foregrounding instead the labor of transcription and the idea of information. In other words, Jubilate Agno splits the difference between serving as a useful database and providing an information overload. As I argue, the formal and critical challenges posed by this poem-archive illustrate how eighteenth-century poetic experimentation was predicated on the existence of imperial archives and how this history continues to shape the poetic function of information and mechanism in contemporary poetry. Underlying this analysis is the problem of whether or how eighteenth-century studies can better inhabit its archives and texts—how do we acknowledge history without developing an acquisitive relation to violence, without making violence a commodity within the academy? Rather than answering that question, this essay will consider how Smart’s formal choices, read through an avant-garde approach to information, confront us with it.


This response argues that Daniel O’Quinn’s Engaging the Ottoman Empire uses a methodology from performance studies in order to show the centrality of oral communication to the reconfigured new world order in the wake of the 1699 Treaty of Karlowitz between the Ottoman Empire and the Holy Roman Empire. Taking up Diana Taylor’s framework of the archive and the repertoire, O’Quinn analyzes the treaty negotiations as a scenario in which the text is supplemented with the spatial and embodied vocabularies of performance. In doing so, O’Quinn emphasizes the cosmopolitan potential in the imagining of peace before the Western/Eastern dichotomy calcified.


This essay focuses on Daniel O’Quinn’s argument that Lady Mary Wortley Montagu’s letter book can be read as a “counter-epic.” Comparing O’Quinn’s approach to other influential accounts of the role of epic in eighteenth-century literature, it explores how translations of and allusions to Virgil’s Aeneid shape the ways in which intercultural contact can be represented and understood.


Scholars in recent years have attempted to complicate understandings of Robinson Crusoe as an economic man. This essay joins in such efforts by studying how Crusoe actively seeks out and forms close, tight-knit communities with those he meets in order to survive. In particular, I examine the Crusoe trilogy against the backdrop of the trading guilds of eighteenth-century London, tracing how Crusoe employs similar strategies to those employed by the guilds to grow and maintain his membership. Contrary to Ian Watt’s influential claim that Crusoe stands as an emblem of individualism, I propose that Crusoe is more akin to the leader of a group or commune who builds and maintains filiative and affiliative relations through the use of coercion and violence. In the uncertain world that Daniel Defoe has crafted, the production and exchange of goods and the destruction of life and property all count as rational, economic decisions, for these decisions are all made in a bid to ensure the survival of the groups to which Crusoe belongs.


This article situates itself among recent work that focuses on the friendship plot. The emergence of the friendship plot in eighteenth-century literature can be attributed to moral sense theorist Francis Hutcheson and his followers David Hume and Adam Smith, for whom friendship was essential to strengthening the moral sense of the individual and for creating a moral society. The prevalence of the trope of friendship and its related virtues of loyalty and benevolence in the late eighteenth-century novel is evidence of this influence. Recent work on friendship in the early novel has emphasized the importance of equality in these friendship tropes. This article contends that these novels often instead represent complicated asymmetry within British society through socially dependent protagonists. In reading Maria Edgeworth’s Belinda (1801) and the anonymously written The Woman of Colour (1808), this article shows that although the dependent friend protagonist does not act without self-interest, in her ability to elicit sympathy and forge friendships with characters in more powerful positions, she provides opportunities to unravel gender and racial prejudices.


Robert Burns contributed to the collection, compilation, and editing of several song collections, most notably The Scots Musical Museum (1797–1803), although he did not live to see it published. Attribution has proven to be a sticky point of consideration for literary scholars as Burns moved through this conceptual musical museum like a curator: changing, editing, and wholly rewriting sections of song texts to fit his poetic sensibilities. Some tunes were indeed traditional and even Scottish in origin, appearing as they had in earlier collections, while others were almost completely changed, with Burns altering the original text and subverting the traditional message. This, however, had been the traditional art of the ballad maker, and Burns embraced this role, changing both texts and tunes as part of a living, oral tradition. The study focuses on two tunes out of his larger collections, “Greensleeves” and “Ye Jacobites by Name.” “Greensleeves” was a well-known English tune, and “Ye Jacobites by Name” was a ballad that had been used both to attack and justify Scottish resistance to Hanoverian rule. Neither piece would seem to be a particularly promising representation of Scottish culture c. 1800. These pieces, however, highlight an aspect of Burns’s work that not only illuminates his attention to the musicality of these pieces—in an age when most song collections were still printed without notated music—but also his efforts to curate these works, refashioning them to suit a new, proto- Romantic Scottish identity.


This essay argues that The Farther Adventures of Robinson Crusoe, the sequel to the best-selling Strange Surprizing Adventures of Robinson Crusoe, is an argument for early religious education. In the verdant world of Crusoe’s island, we see the importation of religious instruction from Defoe’s The Family Instructor, written only a few years before the Crusoe trilogy. At the outset of The Farther Adventures, Robinson Crusoe departs for his island, leaving his children in the care of his “good Friend the Widow.” Repeating the past, Crusoe deprives his own children of paternal involvement in their religious education, just as his own father had neglected to participate in his own religious upbringing. As the island becomes Christianized by a French Catholic priest and as its inhabitants embrace family life and religious education, Crusoe finds himself an outsider who cannot remain on the island. Unable to join the “circle of Christianity” on the island and unable to resist his compulsion to wander, Crusoe sets off for the “Brazils.” As a result, the lessons of family instruction, transplanted by Defoe into Crusoe’s Caribbean island, have to be taught without the aid of the hero.


This article examines the new type of hero created by Ayn Rand and finds its roots in Chernyshevsky's "new human." Rand's characters share such features as extremism, asceticism, escapism, and the desire to transform the world. Moreover, Rand's heroes exhibit the self-building and "wholeness" traits of the "superhuman" as found in myths and in Renaissance and Masonic ideas.


The choreographer George Balanchine famously declared that “I don’t create or invent anything, I assemble.” I take the import of this pronouncement to be that he conceived his artistic mission to be that of articulating (in movement) those liberatory tendencies that, without his work, might very well have remained inchoate for his audience, and I illustrate this reading through an examination of his 1957 masterpiece Agon, a ballet whose central pas de deux is a symbolic violation of the laws against miscegenation.


Commentators have sometimes underappreciated or misunderstood the point of Hume’s theory of the passions. This paper offers an overview of the literature on Hume’s psychology of the passions, with the aim of showing that it is not simply another mechanistic analysis alongside the offerings of Malebranche, Hobbes, and Spinoza. Recent discussions reveal that Hume’s theory makes an influential contribution to the eighteenth-century debate on the importance of certain passions in human well-being, offers a conception of a social rather than a solitary self, and, among other things, has important implications for moral and motivational theory. This essay begins with the background to and the details of Hume’s theory, with reference to contemporary interpretive treatments of Hume’s taxonomy of the passions. It then considers specific questions to which Hume’s theory of the passions has given rise, and appraises the various perspectives offered in response. Last, it considers broad interpretations concerning the import of Hume’s theory of the passions on the whole: that the passions are crucial to morality; that the passions offer a solution to the problem of the self; that the passions are key to sociability and self-regulation; and that the passions play a fundamental role in religion and in the appreciation of tragedy. Throughout, this essay also notes topics on which more scholarly discussion would be especially beneficial.


Some recent considerations of religion and psychiatry have drawn a distinction between pathological and spiritual/mystical experiences of mental phenomena typically regarded as within the realm of psychiatry (e.g. depression, hearing voices, seeing visions/hallucinations). Such a distinction has clinical implications, particularly in relation to whether some religious people who suffer from depression, hear voices, or see visions should be biomedically treated.


Approaching this question from a theological and philosophical perspective, I draw a distinction between (what I call) ‘spiritual health’ (SH) and ‘potentially transformative’ (PT) theologies, arguing that a PT model is therapeutically and philosophically more sound than a SH one. I then apply this to the clinical debate in critical dialogue with Dein and Durà-Vilà’s 2009 article, ‘The Dark Night of the Soul: spiritual distress and psychiatric implications’. My primary focus is on depression, though the discussion is also relevant to debates about psychosis and schizophrenia.


This essay walks through the ways the pandemic structures and limits our movement in cities. It suggests that our well-worn tropes for walking, in this moment, shore up the power of the state over individual bodies. To imagine the possibility of how bodily movement might resist this power, the essay turns to a rhetorical conception of scale.


This article considers Lisa Feldman Barrett's challenge to Darwin's claim—popularized by Paul Ekman's cross-cultural studies—that facial expressions are intelligible across the species. Barrett considers how Ekman's research expectations normalize Eurocentric gestures; she proposes that emotions are not hardwired but constructed in a dynamic interplay of interpretation and prediction. Drawing connections between this argument and decolonial feminist challenges to prominent Western accounts of what it means to be human—including Sylvia Wynter on the "ethnoclass of Man" and Sianne Ngai on racialized and feminized "animatedness"—this article explores what assumptions might underpin claims of affective intelligibility across cultures, and develops concepts toward a decolonial feminist affect theory.


This article argues that there is an elemental confluence between the moral ideal of cosmopolitanism and the economic and commercial practices of globalization. By looking at Foucault’s and Arendt’s readings of Kant, I show that the cosmopolitan premise of humanity is bound to an eschatological vision of the end of politics. In aligning Foucault’s discussion of state-phobia with Arendt’s discussion of world alienation, I argue that the eclipse of the public realm is intrinsic to the liberal conception of progress. While critics have viewed Arendt’s social/political distinction with suspicion, less attention has been paid to the parallel contrast between intimacy and privacy in her work and to the ways in which her critique of intimacy’s worldlessness converges with her depiction of the crisis of modernity. In Arendt’s account, the social swallows up and depoliticizes the public realm and spits out intimacy (limitless interiority) as the consolation for this loss.


Psychiatry has a habit of ignoring its past, which is understandable but, in some instances, a mistake. It is my contention that some of the lacunae about mood disorder in today's psychiatric understanding and treatment may be illuminated by the medical lore captured in Burton's Anatomy of Melancholy (1621). The implications of the present analysis for network based accounts of depression seem to encourage a reconsideration of therapeutic and remedial principles based on those found in Burton's work.