This article describes an innovative pedagogical technique for multimodal com-
position courses: the use of storyboarding as an invention tool across multiple composition
platforms. Student response data and our textual analysis of their multimodal texts over a
two-year period reveal some challenges when new media projects are taught alongside tradi-tional essay writing. Our research also shows that basic writing students were more likely to see similarities between the two assignments when they were asked to use a similar process of invention. Utilizing composition concepts in tandem to compose two similar but different products (essay and video) that ostensibly reside in different spaces and times provides unique opportunities for teachers and students in the basic writing classroom to discuss conventional compositional moves - context , style , evidence, warrants- and to discuss argumentation more broadly. Reemphasizing the role of invention in multi-modal instruction as a critical component in the process of new media instruction may help students' ability to transfer writing knowledge from one assignment to another.


This essay describes the process of reassessing our BW program at the University
of Michigan-Dearborn in order to cultivate a more deliberate, transparent negotiation among
stakeholders toward a “transcultural ethos.” Informed by Bruce Horner’s argument that
leading-edge work on language and language difference can take place in BW, we formed a
working group that conducted a two-year study designed to serve three purposes: to account
for the local contexts of increasing language diversity in our BW classrooms; to revise the BW curriculum in ways that accounted for our evolving local contexts; and to begin fostering a transcultural ethos for our writing program. We found that the most progress toward these
goals was made when language use was treated as a subject of critical inquiry, reflection, and analysis in the classroom. We also found that code-meshing approaches could foster student agency while making acts of negotiation more deliberate. The imperative to continue building toward a transcultural ethos has prompted us to pay more attention to the risks of commodify-ing student writing and to place greater emphasis on teacher self-reflection.


As the cost of college tuition continues to soar, community colleges and state
and local governments offer a wide range of access and opportunity programs to best serve
low-income and academically underprepared students. In this article, I present a case study
of two instructors, both of whom regularly teach Basic Writing courses at the community
college, and examine how administrative and financial aid policies, as well as outreach and
opportunity program protocol, affect classroom pedagogy and student experience. Ultimately, I argue that these two educators, one part-time and one full-time, successfully navigate the bureaucracy of a complex policy network only through repeated concrete interactions with students and over extended periods of time. Many instructors with lower levels of policy literacy, and especially those novice, part-time, and contingent instructors tasked with teaching in a web of policies, may struggle to best serve Basic Writing students at the community college in ways yet unaccounted for by the field.


This article uses Zak Lancaster’s 2016 discovery that academics do not actually write the way They Say/I Say says they do to reflect on relations between, on the one hand, facts about academic writing and, on the other, the pedagogical values that underlie and guide those facts—or, put another way, to reflect on how values we may espouse relate to the facts of actual practice. What implications for how we teach Basic Writing follow from the facts of how academics write? I argue that what “follows” is deliberative, not deductive: although value-laden practice may emerge from and relate to certain facts, such practice is
not necessarily entailed by those facts. Some discussion of is/ought relations helps explain
this argument, i.e., that how things go is not always how they should. This argument also
points, then, toward the good that Basic Writing should promote.


This article examines the bungled execution of Bennie Swim in Woodstock, New
Brunswick, in 1922 following his trial and conviction for the murder of Olive Swim
Trenholm. It explores the criticism over Swim’s execution and the subsequent debate
about capital punishment, including whether hanging was a humane method of
executing a condemned prisoner. It also assesses the social construction of the rural New
Brunswicker as a “beast of the field” and rural New Brunswick as the “bad lands,” and how
these images informed some observers’ views of Olive Swim Trenholm and Bennie Swim,
including his actions and his execution.


In June 1959, the fishing fleet leaving from the wharf at Escuminac in northeastern New
Brunswick was struck by a hurricane resulting in the deaths of 35 men. The Escuminac
Disaster was one of the worst work-related disasters in the province’s history, creating
a significant challenge for dependents left behind with limited resources. In response,
provincial leaders – both secular and religious – created the New Brunswick Fishermen’s
Disaster Fund. The administrators of the fund, mostly well-to-do and English-speaking,
exhibited great difficulty in understanding the survival strategies employed by families, all
of whom were poor and many of whom were Acadian.


Documents left by a French Roman Catholic missionary and an Acadian merchant captain
with Caribbean connections have revealed that Black people were enslaved by, and in
other unfree and labouring relations with, a prominent Acadian network. Analyzed and
placed into conversation with broader studies of Maritime slavery and the silences of
Acadian public memory, these sources position two well-known Acadian community
leaders alongside other Loyalist slaveholders in early Nova Scotia. The heirs of these two
men signed an 1807 petition to the provincial legislature to secure their property in slaves
at a time when anti-slavery sentiment and abolitionist policy were otherwise gaining
influence in the British Empire.


Over the last decade, Cree visual and performance artist Kent Monkman has undertaken an innovative and searching exploration of Romantic painting. Yet, the centrality of Romanticism in his oeuvre has hitherto been misunderstood. Drawing on the resources of Romantic historiography, he modulates historical distance—sympathetic proximity and cerebral distanciation—not only to "redistance" history to meet contemporary needs, but to complicate the movements of identification and alienation. Monkman's work may be ironic, but his is a strangely compassionate irony in which the relationship between European and non-Indigenous peoples is framed with a delicate hope for sincere reconciliation.


Through a summation of representative critical works that challenge us to think of new ways of imagining performing bodies and racial performance, this essay gestures towards a process-oriented approach for theorizing the performance of blackness. The essay argues that understanding performance-as-relation and performance-as-process allows us not only to extend our conception of performance to capture traces of its more evanescent elements in material objects and immaterial behaviors, but also to bring together new forms of historical evidence to give weight to our analyses of the performance of blackness across time and space, opening new avenues for a liberatory critique.


The seemingly benevolent chimney-sweep literature written between 1785–1825 reflects the antiblack attitudes that permeated the Romantic period. Blackness in this body of literature suggests that whether sweeps are characterized as benign or threatening, they were reviled by reformers and protectors for being Black. Sweeps, this essay argues, became canvases for benevolent activists on which to project their racist anxieties about the transitory nature of Blackness. Such readings further enable us to see that fears of Blackness instantiate Britain's anxieties about its failure to produce a material atmosphere that secured neat distinctions between white and black bodies.


This contribution reorients what Paul de Man calls "the human predicament" in his influential essay "The Rhetoric of Temporality." Colliding de Man's account of allegory and irony with paradigms articulated in Black Studies, it attempts to radicalize de Man's framework by questioning the implicit racial ontology in the "predicament" of self and language he outlines. Because de Man has proven so influential in Romantic Studies, I suggest, by way of a brief reading of Phillis Wheatley alongside Wordsworth, that this reorientation of de Man has implications for a much broader reorientation of Romanticism.


This essay engages with the prophetic language of Black British abolitionist Quobna Ottobah Cugoano (1757–c. 1801) as he condemns the humanitarian abuses of the transatlantic slave trade. By examining the abolitionist polemic Thoughts and Sentiments on the Evil and Wicked Traffic of the Slavery and Commerce of the Human Species (1787), I assert that Cugoano's radical rejection of racial categories models a new way for British Romanticism to account for the broader contribution of Black writers beyond the limits of slavery. By invoking the genealogical theory of monogenesis, Cugoano normalizes Black identity as an expression of shared universal humanity.


In 1821, Byron took a respite from writing Don Juan, during which he wrote Cain. Cain strives to attain a rationalist understanding of his predicament, which shapes the tragic arc of the play. This paper contends that reading Byron's Cain and Heaven and Earth with Shestov's philosophy of tragedy and insistence on God as a creative rather than rational being highlights the way Cain acts as a foil for the author of Don Juan, illustrating how Byron's poetic practice mirrors the capriciousness of the deity he obliquely represents.


This essay proposes that Romantic studies needs to overhaul its canonical theories of language in order to contend with the rhetoric of racialization that underwrites and sustains structures of antiblackness. Scholarship often casts the apparent instability of race in the period as potentially liberatory, having derived its ideas about rhetoricity from the tradition of rhetorical deconstruction. Arguing that this tendency is both historically and theoretically misguided, the essay identifies an alternative model of rhetorical reading in the work of Hortense Spillers and develops its implications through analyzing a couplet from Mary Robinson's "The Negro Girl" (1800).


This essay offers readings of four of Lucille Clifton's poems in order to examine her references and allusions to the work of the "big six" British Romantic poets. It proposes that she transforms the writing of these historical authors to serve her own artistic and political ends. In her poems, voices across centuries, continents, races, and genders mingle methodically through a poetics of collaboration that both acknowledges and revises the poetry of these canonical white male poets for contemporary times and for diverse audiences.


Maria Edgeworth's Belinda (1800) has long been understood as the author's most straightforwardly "realist" novel. This article troubles that assumption by returning to the author's deep familiarity with Enlightenment moral philosophy, particularly Adam Smith's Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759), and, in turn, uncovering the novel's strange admixture of Enlightenment rationality and Romantic intuitiveness—a mode of "Romantic realism" that champions fact-based induction, on the one hand, and, on the other, remains supple to epistemological challenges posed against that model by poets (and plagiarizers) such as Samuel Taylor Coleridge with his theory of imagination's "esemplastic power."


This paper discusses animal domestication and its relation to the boundary between humans and animals, as theorized in Buffon’s Histoire Naturelle. Despite recognizing that human beings are animals, Buffon rejects any suggestion that these two classes might be equated. On the contrary, there is a profound difference between them, which Buffon states in core passages of the Histoire Naturelle, notably the “Natural History of Man” (1749) and “Of the Nature of Animals” (1753). In these texts, Buffon suggests that humans and animals are distinct in the same manner as spirit is distinct from matter, thus giving the impression of an absolute denial of rationality to animals, much like the Cartesian concept of the animal-machine. However, as my exploration reveals, Buffon’s ideas regarding domestication can help us better understand his distinction, which should be approached less from a metaphysical or theological point of view than from a naturalist one. From this perspective, the profound difference between humans and animals lies in the violence and dominance perpetrated by humans on animals.


Captain Charles Johnson’s A General History of the Pyrates demonstrates a complex, even ambivalent, ethical perspective on the pirates who form the subject of his narratives. On the one hand, Johnson acknowledges that pirates, legally designated as hostis humani generis, the “enemy of all humanity,” are monsters with respect to legitimate trade; their rapacity and violence threaten the stability of Commerce itself. On the other hand, Johnson engages with Bernard Mandeville’s argument, in The Fable of the Bees, that vice is, in fact, an integral part of a functioning modern society: Johnson even acknowledges that successful pirates display some aspects of “great men.” This article examines Johnson’s moral perspective on pirates in the General History and compares this perspective to comments made about Mandeville’s controversial book by two figures often associated with the mysterious Johnson: Daniel Defoe and Nathaniel Mist.


This review of Daniel O’Quinn’s Engaging the Ottoman Empire focuses on his analysis of visual art within a media framework. I focus particular attention on chapters 2 and 3, which foreground the Ottoman paintings of Jean Baptiste Vanmour in the first third of the eighteenth century. Noting the challenge of integrating oil painting into media analysis, the review notes the book’s successful deployment of close visual analysis in a sophisticated social history of art.


Maple sugar was a multivalent product in the New France. Before the “discovery” of maples by early American boosters like Thomas Jefferson or Benjamin Rush, French settlers in Canada had already developed a deep connection to maple sap and its sugary products. Although it failed to enter the world market in the eighteenth century like its cane cousin, maple sugar held intriguing—but ultimately unrealized—possibilities for New France within a mercantilist framework. This natural sweetener also fueled a utopian vision of New France and troubled eighteenth-century French beliefs about their own mastery of knowledge, the environment, technology, and the Indigenous Peoples of North America. This article assesses descriptions of maple sugar in both French texts, such as those by Sieur de Dièreville, Baron de Lahontan, Joseph-François de Lafitau, and Pierre-Xavier de Charlevoix, as well as texts associated with several Indigenous nations of the Great Lakes in order to explore the history of sweetness beyond the sugar plantation.


This essay examines Joseph Highmore’s Pamela paintings, possibly the first series of paintings derived from an English novel, in relation to evolving artistic and social practices in the first half of the eighteenth century. Despite the significance of Highmore’s work, the series has been evaluated primarily for its illustrative fidelity to Richardson’s novel. This essay analyzes the series as a production parallel to the novel that is responding to recent developments in the art market that prompted anxieties around issues of class and behavior as the audience for artworks expanded beyond the aristocracy. Drawing on his work in portraiture, a genre at the center of these anxieties, Highmore utilized the popularity of Pamela’s narrative to provide his audience with a lesson in the moral dimensions of spectatorship, depicting the dangers of improper viewing and the social benefits of a moral spectatorship, akin to Richardson’s text’s attention to the correct reading of character. Ultimately, Highmore’s paintings offer a moral pedagogy that makes the proper understanding of paintings a model for properly understanding people.


Daniel Defoe was regarded by many of his contemporaries as a somewhat sinister figure—a representative of the “commonwealth principles” that had propelled the rebellion against Charles I and the advent of Oliver Cromwell. He was viewed, particularly by the Tories, as a proponent of mob rule, an enemy of the divine right of kings, and a proponent of a completely egalitarian society. The Whigs had a somewhat more favorable opinion of him, at least until his defense of the “Tory” peace with France in 1712. Most of these criticisms were correct. Some of his principles were indeed both “Hobbish” and “Mobbish.” In fact, Defoe believed in the equality of each person at birth, and he believed that government, at its moment of formation, depended on the will of every person. He also believed that a properly informed “mob,” such as that of the Revolution of 1688–89, might be the instrument through which a bad government could be removed. But if self-defense was his most essential principle, he did not believe it would ever lead to absolutism. The heroes and heroines of his fictions tend to rise, through their natural abilities, from dire poverty or extreme conditions to considerable wealth.


This essay explores what difference it makes that late seventeenth-century Japanese prose fiction, including the work of Ihara Saikaku, was far more frequently and extensively illustrated than its European counterparts. Part of the explanation for this may simply be economic and technological, but a more interesting answer lies in Japanese books' commitment to a far more visual (and often far less moralized) aesthetic, one that encourages a surprised and delighted savoring of the world (a stance intriguingly modeled for us, both visually and textually, by a passing woodcutter in Saikaku's Kōshoku gonin onna [Five Women Who Loved Love]). This intensely visual aesthetic, in turn, solicits a rather different kind of narrative engagement than that invited by most European fiction of the period: one far less interested in individuals qua individuals, far less obsessed with interiority, and far more willing to acknowledge the place that pleasure can and ought to have in our lives. All of which is to say that Saikaku's work and other ukiyo-zōshi [books of the floating world] can usefully contribute to the ongoing project of provincializing Europe (and the equally urgent project in literary studies of provincializing Defoe and perhaps the Anglophone novel more generally).


In recent years the academic study of literature has been riven by debates over the merits of “critique” (and near synonyms like “strong theory” and “hermeneutics”). In most of these debates, the only imaginable alternatives to the ostensibly destructive and “suspicious” practices of critique have been various forms of “weak” (i.e., descriptive, contextualizing, or affective) theory. In this essay we argue that: a) the dichotomy presented by advocates of “critique” and “postcritique” is a false one, and b) there is an ambitious and complex species of theory native to the eighteenth century that stands outside this dichotomy altogether. We trace the origins of this “native” theory in the work of a series of authors from Locke, to Dryden and Behn, to Addison, Fielding, and Johnson, to (ultimately) Wollstonecraft and Wordsworth. We argue that this native theory is an outgrowth of period thinking about contracts and (especially) liberalism. Although this theoretical tradition was extinguished, primarily by the “hermeneutic turn” of the early nineteenth century, before it could be fully articulated, we argue that it points to an ethical mode of reading that may be vital to the survival of the discipline today.


This brief response to the other contributions in this cluster highlights their implications for thinking across disciplines and for thinking about the vexed category of peace.




The author explains how Rand was absolutely correct in saying that Aristotle "stated the formula" of the Law of Identity. He corrects long-standing faulty Thomist criticisms on this issue and gives due credit to thinkers such as Antonius Andreas, Leibniz, and William Hamilton. The author further contends that the gradual shift in Objectivist usage of the Law of Identity (from "a thing is itself" to "a thing is what it is") tacitly ratifies these erroneous criticisms and has actually contributed to the failure of Objectivist thinkers to develop Rand's concept theory into a valid model of propositions and syllogisms.


This article engages the work of John Dewey to outline a pragmatist philosophy of communication that is adaptive to the undemocratic effects of extreme partisanship in belief and argument. Using his aesthetic theory, I sketch out an account of the phenomenological motions of communicative experience of self among others. I then examine the ways that partisan habits of thinking can warp our communicative activities. Drawing upon Dewey’s writings on logic and ethics, I examine his account of the habits of intelligent communication. Building on this ideal, I propose “sympathy” as both a feeling and a cognitive method to decrease the pull of distorting partisan habits of reasoning in communicative situations. Linking mindful receptivity to conversational others and an explicit method of charity becomes a viable way to instill true communicative respect in democratic communicators.


Shot through with Schlegel’s insight that “words often understand themselves better than those who use them, ” Walter’s Benjamin’s 1916 essay, “On Language as Such and on the Language of Man” extends an invitation to reflect on those words that speak to the recognizability of language, the name of that in which language abides and discloses itself. For now, a century after it was first composed as an unsent letter, a close consideration of Benjamin’s important essay sheds light on the contemporary question of recognition, the not yet rhetorical question of how the ethical-political stakes of recognition may hinge on the (dis)possession of (its) language.


In this article, I begin by examining critically the Socratic claim that the unexamined life is not worth living. I identify three clusters of problems with this claim. I then consider the consequences of these problems by contemplating a different view of the relation of self-knowledge to the good life. For purposes of illustration, I draw on the film version of the well-known novel Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil. In particular, I consider the significance and the limits of a central idea in this film—the notion of an overpaint (literally a painting that has been painted over) and the claim that not knowing what is beneath the overpaint can be enjoyable. I develop this idea with reference to the philosophies of William James and Gilles Deleuze and conclude by describing the ways in which this view reorients the practice of philosophy from wisdom (sophia) to practical intelligence (freeness).