Despite a whole series of political, socio-economic and cultural impediments, a small but significant corpus of religious/devotional, antiquarian, grammatical and lexicographical texts, wholly or partly written in Irish, supplemented the Church of Ireland’s and the Roman Catholic church’s contribution to the printed book in Irish between the end of the Jacobite/Williamite War (1691) and the Act of Union (1800). These works invariably related to religion or grammar and were either funded by the various communions or by the proliferation of antiquarian, learned and religious societies which emerged in the last decades of the eighteenth century. Furthermore, these last decades of the eighteenth century also witnessed the emergence of a printed literature in Irish, almost exclusively derived from the Irish manuscript tradition. The story of the Irish Book (in Irish) is a story of continuity, consolidation, development and diversification. Macpherson’s Ossian (1761) encouraged Irish-language writers, scholars and publishers to diversify from purely religious and grammatical texts to historical, hagiographical, annalistic and literary works based on the language’s unrivalled manuscript heritage. Their travails brought Irish literature to a wider European audience and effectively established Irish philology and linguistics as professional European academic disciplines.




This essay explores Protestant depictions of Irish history in sermons preached from the 1730s to the 1790s before the Incorporated Society in Dublin for Promoting English Protestant Schools in Ireland and its sister body, the London Society Corresponding with the Incorporated Society in Dublin. ‘Working schools’, where the children of Catholic parents were reared as Protestants, seemed to the Societies’ supporters spearheads for Ireland’s spiritual and temporal renewal, and the preachers — all eminent figures in the Church of Ireland or the Church of England — set that regeneration in a perceived historical context. They deplored the ‘barbarity’ of Ireland’s past, the baneful impact of ‘Popery’ over centuries, and the deficiencies of Ireland’s traditional economy and society. They praised English rule in Ireland, expounded the role of Providence in Irish history, and, displaying both optimism and pessimism about the condition of eighteenth-century Ireland, sketched visions of the kingdom’s future. Collectively, the sermons provided justifications for the Protestant Ascendancy and blueprints for the English and Protestant ‘improvement’ of Ireland.


Unlike England and Wales - but like many other European countries at the time -eighteenth-century Ireland did not have a national system of poor laws. In 1772, the Parliament passed legislation which would have seen houses of industry established throughout Ireland. However, as this was subject to local initiative, in fact only a small number of houses of industry were founded. There has been little study of the reasons why Parliament, generally seen as unsympathetic to the plight of the poor, adopted this legislation. Richard Woodward’s contemporary publications on relief of the poor are often cited as the inspiration for the legislation but this does not explain why Parliament chose to act in the 1770s. Nor has there been much work on the reasons why certain poor houses were established. Consequently, the article examines two key issues: why the legislation was adopted in 1772; and where and why it was implemented (or not implemented) in the following decades.


This article uses the career of Sir Richard Cox, a prolific pamphleteer and MP for the Co. Cork borough of Clonakility, to provide a case study of mid-eighteenth-century Irish patriotism. It analyses Cox’s pamphlets, his involvement in political disputes, his record as an MP, his commitment to economic improvement and his management of his Dunmanway estate. In doing so, the article attempts to resolve some of the difficulties with interpreting patriotism, in particular the problem of balancing political principle with opportunism and careerism. The article also seeks to determine how far Cox represented a practical strand of patriotism, where the main concern was with solving Ireland’s economic problems rather than constitutional issues. In order to establish whether Cox’s patriotism was representative of a wider contemporary mood, the article assesses his activities in the context of pamphleteering and parliamentary output in mid-eighteenth-century Ireland.


When Britain captured the Cape of Good Hope at the end of the eighteenth century, it was already part of a sophisticated maritime system of strategic and commercial interests. But the first decades of British rule in Southern Africa facilitated the development of another set of connections and exchanges: three of the first four British civilian governors came from Ireland. The governorships of Lord Macartney and Lord Caledon in particular reveal how a geographically disparate community reflecting Irish contacts, concerns and contexts was consolidated using the maritime connections of the burgeoning British Empire. Many of the contacts these men forged, the requests for patronage they attracted, and the news and intelligence they received were a consequence of their Irish backgrounds. Lord Caledon, for example, was at the heart of a set of overseas correspondents that preserved local community connections focused on a small village in south Tyrone. But other aspects of late-eighteenth-century Ireland - mobile, subversive and revolutionary - were also dispersed across this global empire. The upheavals of 1798, for example, reverberated well beyond the shores of the British Isles: Lord Macartney received regular bulletins; army mutinies at the Cape were blamed on ‘Vinegar Hill boys’; and even the gardener accompanying Lord Caledon’s Norfolk pines was a former United Irish rebel transported to Australia. This article demonstrates how the complexities and ambiguities of Ireland’s place in the British Empire were preserved, recreated and reshaped far away from Europe by maritime circuits of communication and exchange. By focusing on the example of the Cape, the discussion illustrates the ways in which eighteenth-century Ireland influenced, and was in turn influenced by, the networks of empire extending across the British World at this time.


This article explores the cultural strategies James Barry (1741-1806) deployed in his writings on art throughout his artistic career. In commercial terms, Barry was a marginal figure who worked in an artistic genre, history painting, in aesthetic and economic decline. However, throughout his literary career, Barry argued for the artistic, philosophical and cultural centrality of the history painter in shaping an enlightened public in late eighteenth-century London. This article examines the various ways Barry drew on historical, political and aesthetic precedents - embodied by diverse literary, mythological and artistic figures - to argue for the importance of the genre of history painting in general and his own history painting work, notably The Progress of Human Culture, in particular.


The Amazoniad (1806), a mock-heroic poem in five cantos written in the style of Alexander Pope’s verse satires, lampoons Dublin society in the aftermath of the Union of Great Britain and Ireland in 1801. In it John Wilson Croker, regarded as one of the founders of the modern Conservative party, attacks the newly formed Whig government and its local representative, the lord lieutenant of Ireland and his court. Central to The Amazoniad (which has not received any critical attention until now) is the notion of performance: one of its two main episodes takes place in a theatre, and a principal object of its satire is the performance the Whigs are supposedly putting on to both overawe and mollify the Irish people, who were largely in a state of nervous uncertainty and discontent after the tumultuous events of the previous few years (the United Irishmen Rebellion of 1798 and the permanent dissolution of the Irish Parliament in 1800). The poem sheds light on a particularly anxious moment of Irish life and offers evidence that the influence wielded by some women during the period of an independent Irish Parliament had already contracted by the early days of the Union.


Hugh Boulter, Archbishop of Armagh and a leading figure in the early Hanoverian Irish government (1724-42), is remembered by historians chiefly for his promotion of ‘the English interest’ in church and state. This article suggests a more complex view. It examines his English background, in particular his editorship of the Whig journal, The Freethinker, and his connections with the other editors, two of whom also came to Ireland with him, Richard West (as Lord Chancellor) and Ambrose Philips. It explores the immediate political context of his appointment at a time of mounting opposition to Walpole’s government, which included an Irish ‘patriot’ opposition articulated, for some, by Jonathan Swift. It considers the extent to which an Irish Toryism, often thought moribund, survived in this opposition. Finally it discusses the interplay of Whig, Tory and Trish patriot’ elements in conflicts in the Irish church, especially over the English Whig plan to abolish Ireland’s Sacramental Test, and the complex role played by Boulter in this. Overall this article suggests that the conflicts of Boulter’s Irish career arose not only from ‘national’ or Irish/ English opposition, but from party politics, from divisions between Whig and Tory and between different varieties of Whiggism.


Jonathan Swift made a name for himself in England in the years 1710-14 taking issue in print with, among other things, Standing Armies, the British National Debt, and Westminster MPs who seemed too willing to vote new taxes at the behest of the Whitehall government. After more than a decade of silence on such subjects, Swift re-visited them in the late 1720s and early 1730s in relation to Ireland as part of his expression of anger about what, in his eyes, was fundamentally wrong with Hanoverian government in the British Isles. This article assesses his reasons for doing so, commencing with a detailed consideration of the 1728 Poem, ‘The Grand Question debated: Whether Hamilton’s Bawn should be turned into a Barracks or a Malt-House’. It then proceeds to examine in a series of other works by Swift up to 1733 the key emerging themes of government patronage of MPs in return for the voting of additional taxation and increases to the national debt and the expenditure of that increased income on the military, in particular for the building of a country-wide network of army barracks in Ireland. In so doing the article looks to address how such matters help us to better understand the nature of Irish government, politics and society at that time.


Recent research has expanded our knowledge of Irish fiction before 1800 and has allowed readings of previously neglected texts as early Irish novels. Charles Johnston (c.1719-c.1800) is one example of a lesser-known novelist whose work has received more sustained engagement as a result. This article builds on recent scholarship on Johnston to interrogate his late novel, The History of John Juniper (1781). This novel has been dismissed as less successful, and of less merit, than other works by Johnston. I argue, however, that the representation of Ireland in John Juniper is both nuanced and distinctive. In this novel Johnston, an Irish novelist based in London, offers depictions of Irish migration to Britain and across the empire, and demonstrates a critical awareness of stereotypical representations of his own nation. John Juniper repudiates the conventional association between the Irish and crime through a plotline in which the concept of an inherited disposition is questioned. An Irish perspective on British and colonial politics in the late eighteenth century can be discerned within John Juniper.


This article examines the pastoral tradition in Ulster-Scots literature, an emergent form of Irish cultural expression in the eighteenth century. A late eighteenth-century flourishing of Ulster-Scots poetry has often been associated with an east Ulster regional paradigm: the rustic poet, small farmer, egalitarian and Presbyterian, Ulster Scot of Antrim and Down. However this article argues that Ulster-Scots literature begins almost a century earlier, and that the environments depicted in the literary works studied herein, range from the pastoralised landscape of north-west Ireland, and the rugged mountains of Donegal, to the urban, carnivalised confessional spaces of central Dublin. This revision of the growth of Ulster-Scots literature is further complicated by the presence of a ubiquitous Anglo-Irish print culture.


British and Irish Catholics in the eighteenth century encountered considerable difficulties in respect to the ownership and inheritance of land. Catholic chamber counsel, lawyers who themselves were excluded by law from the bar and bench, provided vital assistance to their coreligionists. One such chamber counsel was Matthew Duane from Clonmel, a distinguished patron of the arts, who practised law outside the courtroom in England. This article explores how Duane came to represent prominent Irish landowners of England and Ireland and, in particular, the 7th earl of Fingall. Paradoxically, one of his Protestant law pupils became a leading opponent of Catholic Emancipation. The article demonstrates how Duane, himself reticent to engage in direct political action, was one of a handful of chamber counsel who functioned successfully to preserve a Catholic interest in property at a time when Catholics were largely excluded from public life and disadvantaged in their private affairs.


This article focusses on the expression of emotion in the writings of Sean 6 Neachtain and his son Tadhg. As such, it represents a contribution to the increasing engagement with the impact of modernity on Irish-language communities in urban settings in Ireland in the period 1700-1850. It differs from previous studies in being primarily concerned with the social inter-relationship of members of the 6 Neachtain family circle rather than with the literary activities of the group of some thirty scholars which had formed around them. It sifts the evidence for close ties between father and son, as well as their relationships with their wives and other close relatives and friends over two generations. While recognising the important role of emotion in the lives of earlier generations, this paper argues the case for increasing emotive sophistication and sensibility, as well as greater willingness to give expression to these feelings, in the lives of the 6 Neachtains. This modern Gaelic worldview with its innovatory acknowledgement of the importance of all individuals, be they men, women or children, pervades Tadhg’s writings in particular, and is to be seen in his fondness for tabulation and his recording of family events. It reflects the impact of concepts of modernity and the enlightenment, with which the 6 Neachtains were in regular contact in the vibrant intellectual atmosphere of the bilingual city of Dublin, 1700-1750.


To a considerable extent, eighteenth-century Anglo-Irish verse circulated in manuscript, often remaining completely unprinted. What is needed now is greater attention to a significant body of this manuscript verse, both in Irish libraries and elsewhere. When this verse has been more fully examined, we will be better positioned to assess the work of eighteenth-century Dublin poets and to understand how verse circulated in the Dublin of Swift’s era.
 
This article focuses on the figure of Paddy who came to serve as the male personification of the Irish nation in the late eighteenth century. While much work has focused on British representations of Irishness in the nineteenth century, there has been little attempt to examine earlier ways in which the Irish themselves mobilised this figure in this formative period for understandings of national identity. This article argues that new understandings of Irishness and Irish national identity were articulated through representations of Paddy. Initially a stereotype in the tradition of the stage Irishman, during the ‘free trade’ dispute Paddy was adopted in a range of media such as engravings, ballads, and on the stage to represent a unified, assertive nation in opposition to British policies restricting Irish trade. By the 1790s, Paddy was central to the symbolism of the radical United Irishmen, featuring in the title of a popular collection of ballads, Paddys Resource. It examines the changing nature of Paddy in the late eighteenth century, from the feckless stage Irishman to industrious peasant and his shifting place in understandings of national identity and notions of Irishness.


John Toland’s 1720 Pantheisticon might seem most notable for its mockery of liturgical practice; but the ‘burlesque’ aspects of its form belie a profound – and yet virtually unrecognized – engagement with contemporaneous science. Specifically, and as I want to show here, some of the most conceptually important sections of the Pantheisticon look to integrate scientific speculation with Toland’s wider materialistic, monistic, philosophical understanding. The success of this engagement is no doubt open to question. But what seems beyond dispute is that the Pantheisticon provides further evidence of Toland’s remarkable ability to marshal the intellectual resources of his time for his wider, philosophical, project. In order to make this case, my paper is divided into four parts, followed by a conclusion. First, I sketch an outline of the kind of ‘vitalism’ that had gained intellectual traction by the time Toland composed the Pantheisticon, as I want to show, solely mechanistic understandings of the physical realm were supplemented by a range of important notions, regarding ‘Energy’ and ‘Force’. Next, I sketch some general outlines of the increasingly historical, or historicized, depiction of nature that – in a related but distinct development – had begun to stress chronological change as central in understanding life on Earth. With this bipartite context established, I then turn to the Pantheisticon itself, reading central aspects of it in terms of these two distinct currents – namely, ‘vitalism’ and ‘natural history’. When we consider, as well, that Toland utilizes these two currents without any regard for their original, ‘physico-theological’, setting, we can begin to appreciate more clearly the significance of the Pantheisticon’s engagement with the science of its time: Toland’s purpose, I suggest, is about exploiting significant yet pious scientific insights for a wider – and thoroughly impious – philosophical project.


The intention of this article is to shed new light on Séamas Mac Póilín [James Pulleine], the often-overlooked eighteenth-century priest and scribe from County Down, and the eleven extant Irish devotional texts to which his name might be ascribed. Of these eleven texts, we are confident that two of them were indeed penned by Mac Póilín, namely a catechism intended for young Irish-speaking Catholics (An Teagasg Criosdaithe Angoidhleig) and a funeral oration delivered in Irish at the death of Eoghan Ó Néill of Bannvale, Clonduff (Oratio Funebris Eugenii Ó Néill). Another text, a translation in the Irish of east Ulster of the Latin text, De Imitatio Christi, had previously been ascribed to Mac Póilín. Determining his authorship of the remaining eight texts (namely eight anonymous Irish sermons), however, is more problematic. All of these sermons are explored in this article, together with the other texts, with a view to not only identifying Mac Póilín as their author but to also highlight their dialectal and linguistic value in the context of the Irish dialect of County Down and of sermon-writing in Irish in the eighteenth century.


This article seeks to demonstrate that the anonymous pamphlet, ‘Some Considerations upon the Late Attempt to Repeal the Test Act’ (1719), was written by Jonathan Swift. The argument is based on a comparison with other tracts acknowledged to have been written by Swift; a systematic survey of pamphlets dealing with the sacramental test; an examination of the debates over the Irish Toleration Act of 1719; and a reading of the polemical strategy adopted by the author. ‘Some Considerations upon the Late Attempt’ is the most substantial new work to be attributed to Swift in more than fifty years. It marks a turning-point in his polemical career, and it reveals that Swift’s continuing commitment to the defence of the established church was crucial to his re-emergence as ‘the Hibernian Patriot’ in the 1720s.


This article examines patriot sentiment in eighteenth-century Ireland through the developing newspaper press, charting the gradual emergence of a patriot press and the role of that press in articulating a new national identity in the Free Trade Movement of 1779. In describing the role of the press in this political and popular movement, the article explores how individuals and communities collectively expressed a new Irish identity in the Free Trade Protest on 4 November 1779. This appropriation of a Protestant ritual by the patriot nation is evidence of the force of newspaper representations of an imagined Irish patriot nation and the role of ritual and association in allowing diverse sets of individuals, groups, and communities to act out these imagined national identities in reality.


Oliver Goldsmith (1728-1774) wrote across many different genres. However, of his wide authorly scope, much attention has been directed towards his major novelistic, theatrical and poetical works, at the expense of his historical compilations: his two English histories of 1764 and 1771, and his Roman (1769) and Grecian (1774) histories. This article challenges the understanding of Goldsmith as a sort of dilletante when it came to history writing — as someone who only engaged in them for the sake of profit — to instead reveal his deep immersion in the world of Enlightenment historical thought and practice.


In examining the generic uncertainty of, and a range of responses to, Lord Orrery’s Remarks on the Life and Writings of Dr. Jonathan Swift (1751), This essay offers new evidence of the ways readers anxiously responded to the early formation of Swift’s posthumous reputation and, more broadly, to the theory and practice of secular biographical writing. This argument here is that the backlash against Orrery’s Remarks, the first extended biographical account of Swift, reveals much about contemporary attitudes to what a literary biography should look like, what it should and should not reveal about the subject, and how it might frame the subject’s legacy.


This article describes an innovative pedagogical technique for multimodal com-
position courses: the use of storyboarding as an invention tool across multiple composition
platforms. Student response data and our textual analysis of their multimodal texts over a
two-year period reveal some challenges when new media projects are taught alongside tradi-tional essay writing. Our research also shows that basic writing students were more likely to see similarities between the two assignments when they were asked to use a similar process of invention. Utilizing composition concepts in tandem to compose two similar but different products (essay and video) that ostensibly reside in different spaces and times provides unique opportunities for teachers and students in the basic writing classroom to discuss conventional compositional moves - context , style , evidence, warrants- and to discuss argumentation more broadly. Reemphasizing the role of invention in multi-modal instruction as a critical component in the process of new media instruction may help students' ability to transfer writing knowledge from one assignment to another.


This essay describes the process of reassessing our BW program at the University
of Michigan-Dearborn in order to cultivate a more deliberate, transparent negotiation among
stakeholders toward a “transcultural ethos.” Informed by Bruce Horner’s argument that
leading-edge work on language and language difference can take place in BW, we formed a
working group that conducted a two-year study designed to serve three purposes: to account
for the local contexts of increasing language diversity in our BW classrooms; to revise the BW curriculum in ways that accounted for our evolving local contexts; and to begin fostering a transcultural ethos for our writing program. We found that the most progress toward these
goals was made when language use was treated as a subject of critical inquiry, reflection, and analysis in the classroom. We also found that code-meshing approaches could foster student agency while making acts of negotiation more deliberate. The imperative to continue building toward a transcultural ethos has prompted us to pay more attention to the risks of commodify-ing student writing and to place greater emphasis on teacher self-reflection.


As the cost of college tuition continues to soar, community colleges and state
and local governments offer a wide range of access and opportunity programs to best serve
low-income and academically underprepared students. In this article, I present a case study
of two instructors, both of whom regularly teach Basic Writing courses at the community
college, and examine how administrative and financial aid policies, as well as outreach and
opportunity program protocol, affect classroom pedagogy and student experience. Ultimately, I argue that these two educators, one part-time and one full-time, successfully navigate the bureaucracy of a complex policy network only through repeated concrete interactions with students and over extended periods of time. Many instructors with lower levels of policy literacy, and especially those novice, part-time, and contingent instructors tasked with teaching in a web of policies, may struggle to best serve Basic Writing students at the community college in ways yet unaccounted for by the field.


This article uses Zak Lancaster’s 2016 discovery that academics do not actually write the way They Say/I Say says they do to reflect on relations between, on the one hand, facts about academic writing and, on the other, the pedagogical values that underlie and guide those facts—or, put another way, to reflect on how values we may espouse relate to the facts of actual practice. What implications for how we teach Basic Writing follow from the facts of how academics write? I argue that what “follows” is deliberative, not deductive: although value-laden practice may emerge from and relate to certain facts, such practice is
not necessarily entailed by those facts. Some discussion of is/ought relations helps explain
this argument, i.e., that how things go is not always how they should. This argument also
points, then, toward the good that Basic Writing should promote.


This article examines the bungled execution of Bennie Swim in Woodstock, New
Brunswick, in 1922 following his trial and conviction for the murder of Olive Swim
Trenholm. It explores the criticism over Swim’s execution and the subsequent debate
about capital punishment, including whether hanging was a humane method of
executing a condemned prisoner. It also assesses the social construction of the rural New
Brunswicker as a “beast of the field” and rural New Brunswick as the “bad lands,” and how
these images informed some observers’ views of Olive Swim Trenholm and Bennie Swim,
including his actions and his execution.


In June 1959, the fishing fleet leaving from the wharf at Escuminac in northeastern New
Brunswick was struck by a hurricane resulting in the deaths of 35 men. The Escuminac
Disaster was one of the worst work-related disasters in the province’s history, creating
a significant challenge for dependents left behind with limited resources. In response,
provincial leaders – both secular and religious – created the New Brunswick Fishermen’s
Disaster Fund. The administrators of the fund, mostly well-to-do and English-speaking,
exhibited great difficulty in understanding the survival strategies employed by families, all
of whom were poor and many of whom were Acadian.


Documents left by a French Roman Catholic missionary and an Acadian merchant captain
with Caribbean connections have revealed that Black people were enslaved by, and in
other unfree and labouring relations with, a prominent Acadian network. Analyzed and
placed into conversation with broader studies of Maritime slavery and the silences of
Acadian public memory, these sources position two well-known Acadian community
leaders alongside other Loyalist slaveholders in early Nova Scotia. The heirs of these two
men signed an 1807 petition to the provincial legislature to secure their property in slaves
at a time when anti-slavery sentiment and abolitionist policy were otherwise gaining
influence in the British Empire.


Over the last decade, Cree visual and performance artist Kent Monkman has undertaken an innovative and searching exploration of Romantic painting. Yet, the centrality of Romanticism in his oeuvre has hitherto been misunderstood. Drawing on the resources of Romantic historiography, he modulates historical distance—sympathetic proximity and cerebral distanciation—not only to "redistance" history to meet contemporary needs, but to complicate the movements of identification and alienation. Monkman's work may be ironic, but his is a strangely compassionate irony in which the relationship between European and non-Indigenous peoples is framed with a delicate hope for sincere reconciliation.


Through a summation of representative critical works that challenge us to think of new ways of imagining performing bodies and racial performance, this essay gestures towards a process-oriented approach for theorizing the performance of blackness. The essay argues that understanding performance-as-relation and performance-as-process allows us not only to extend our conception of performance to capture traces of its more evanescent elements in material objects and immaterial behaviors, but also to bring together new forms of historical evidence to give weight to our analyses of the performance of blackness across time and space, opening new avenues for a liberatory critique.


The seemingly benevolent chimney-sweep literature written between 1785–1825 reflects the antiblack attitudes that permeated the Romantic period. Blackness in this body of literature suggests that whether sweeps are characterized as benign or threatening, they were reviled by reformers and protectors for being Black. Sweeps, this essay argues, became canvases for benevolent activists on which to project their racist anxieties about the transitory nature of Blackness. Such readings further enable us to see that fears of Blackness instantiate Britain's anxieties about its failure to produce a material atmosphere that secured neat distinctions between white and black bodies.


This contribution reorients what Paul de Man calls "the human predicament" in his influential essay "The Rhetoric of Temporality." Colliding de Man's account of allegory and irony with paradigms articulated in Black Studies, it attempts to radicalize de Man's framework by questioning the implicit racial ontology in the "predicament" of self and language he outlines. Because de Man has proven so influential in Romantic Studies, I suggest, by way of a brief reading of Phillis Wheatley alongside Wordsworth, that this reorientation of de Man has implications for a much broader reorientation of Romanticism.


This essay engages with the prophetic language of Black British abolitionist Quobna Ottobah Cugoano (1757–c. 1801) as he condemns the humanitarian abuses of the transatlantic slave trade. By examining the abolitionist polemic Thoughts and Sentiments on the Evil and Wicked Traffic of the Slavery and Commerce of the Human Species (1787), I assert that Cugoano's radical rejection of racial categories models a new way for British Romanticism to account for the broader contribution of Black writers beyond the limits of slavery. By invoking the genealogical theory of monogenesis, Cugoano normalizes Black identity as an expression of shared universal humanity.


In 1821, Byron took a respite from writing Don Juan, during which he wrote Cain. Cain strives to attain a rationalist understanding of his predicament, which shapes the tragic arc of the play. This paper contends that reading Byron's Cain and Heaven and Earth with Shestov's philosophy of tragedy and insistence on God as a creative rather than rational being highlights the way Cain acts as a foil for the author of Don Juan, illustrating how Byron's poetic practice mirrors the capriciousness of the deity he obliquely represents.


This essay proposes that Romantic studies needs to overhaul its canonical theories of language in order to contend with the rhetoric of racialization that underwrites and sustains structures of antiblackness. Scholarship often casts the apparent instability of race in the period as potentially liberatory, having derived its ideas about rhetoricity from the tradition of rhetorical deconstruction. Arguing that this tendency is both historically and theoretically misguided, the essay identifies an alternative model of rhetorical reading in the work of Hortense Spillers and develops its implications through analyzing a couplet from Mary Robinson's "The Negro Girl" (1800).


This essay offers readings of four of Lucille Clifton's poems in order to examine her references and allusions to the work of the "big six" British Romantic poets. It proposes that she transforms the writing of these historical authors to serve her own artistic and political ends. In her poems, voices across centuries, continents, races, and genders mingle methodically through a poetics of collaboration that both acknowledges and revises the poetry of these canonical white male poets for contemporary times and for diverse audiences.


Maria Edgeworth's Belinda (1800) has long been understood as the author's most straightforwardly "realist" novel. This article troubles that assumption by returning to the author's deep familiarity with Enlightenment moral philosophy, particularly Adam Smith's Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759), and, in turn, uncovering the novel's strange admixture of Enlightenment rationality and Romantic intuitiveness—a mode of "Romantic realism" that champions fact-based induction, on the one hand, and, on the other, remains supple to epistemological challenges posed against that model by poets (and plagiarizers) such as Samuel Taylor Coleridge with his theory of imagination's "esemplastic power."


This paper discusses animal domestication and its relation to the boundary between humans and animals, as theorized in Buffon’s Histoire Naturelle. Despite recognizing that human beings are animals, Buffon rejects any suggestion that these two classes might be equated. On the contrary, there is a profound difference between them, which Buffon states in core passages of the Histoire Naturelle, notably the “Natural History of Man” (1749) and “Of the Nature of Animals” (1753). In these texts, Buffon suggests that humans and animals are distinct in the same manner as spirit is distinct from matter, thus giving the impression of an absolute denial of rationality to animals, much like the Cartesian concept of the animal-machine. However, as my exploration reveals, Buffon’s ideas regarding domestication can help us better understand his distinction, which should be approached less from a metaphysical or theological point of view than from a naturalist one. From this perspective, the profound difference between humans and animals lies in the violence and dominance perpetrated by humans on animals.


Captain Charles Johnson’s A General History of the Pyrates demonstrates a complex, even ambivalent, ethical perspective on the pirates who form the subject of his narratives. On the one hand, Johnson acknowledges that pirates, legally designated as hostis humani generis, the “enemy of all humanity,” are monsters with respect to legitimate trade; their rapacity and violence threaten the stability of Commerce itself. On the other hand, Johnson engages with Bernard Mandeville’s argument, in The Fable of the Bees, that vice is, in fact, an integral part of a functioning modern society: Johnson even acknowledges that successful pirates display some aspects of “great men.” This article examines Johnson’s moral perspective on pirates in the General History and compares this perspective to comments made about Mandeville’s controversial book by two figures often associated with the mysterious Johnson: Daniel Defoe and Nathaniel Mist.


This review of Daniel O’Quinn’s Engaging the Ottoman Empire focuses on his analysis of visual art within a media framework. I focus particular attention on chapters 2 and 3, which foreground the Ottoman paintings of Jean Baptiste Vanmour in the first third of the eighteenth century. Noting the challenge of integrating oil painting into media analysis, the review notes the book’s successful deployment of close visual analysis in a sophisticated social history of art.


Maple sugar was a multivalent product in the New France. Before the “discovery” of maples by early American boosters like Thomas Jefferson or Benjamin Rush, French settlers in Canada had already developed a deep connection to maple sap and its sugary products. Although it failed to enter the world market in the eighteenth century like its cane cousin, maple sugar held intriguing—but ultimately unrealized—possibilities for New France within a mercantilist framework. This natural sweetener also fueled a utopian vision of New France and troubled eighteenth-century French beliefs about their own mastery of knowledge, the environment, technology, and the Indigenous Peoples of North America. This article assesses descriptions of maple sugar in both French texts, such as those by Sieur de Dièreville, Baron de Lahontan, Joseph-François de Lafitau, and Pierre-Xavier de Charlevoix, as well as texts associated with several Indigenous nations of the Great Lakes in order to explore the history of sweetness beyond the sugar plantation.


This essay examines Joseph Highmore’s Pamela paintings, possibly the first series of paintings derived from an English novel, in relation to evolving artistic and social practices in the first half of the eighteenth century. Despite the significance of Highmore’s work, the series has been evaluated primarily for its illustrative fidelity to Richardson’s novel. This essay analyzes the series as a production parallel to the novel that is responding to recent developments in the art market that prompted anxieties around issues of class and behavior as the audience for artworks expanded beyond the aristocracy. Drawing on his work in portraiture, a genre at the center of these anxieties, Highmore utilized the popularity of Pamela’s narrative to provide his audience with a lesson in the moral dimensions of spectatorship, depicting the dangers of improper viewing and the social benefits of a moral spectatorship, akin to Richardson’s text’s attention to the correct reading of character. Ultimately, Highmore’s paintings offer a moral pedagogy that makes the proper understanding of paintings a model for properly understanding people.


Daniel Defoe was regarded by many of his contemporaries as a somewhat sinister figure—a representative of the “commonwealth principles” that had propelled the rebellion against Charles I and the advent of Oliver Cromwell. He was viewed, particularly by the Tories, as a proponent of mob rule, an enemy of the divine right of kings, and a proponent of a completely egalitarian society. The Whigs had a somewhat more favorable opinion of him, at least until his defense of the “Tory” peace with France in 1712. Most of these criticisms were correct. Some of his principles were indeed both “Hobbish” and “Mobbish.” In fact, Defoe believed in the equality of each person at birth, and he believed that government, at its moment of formation, depended on the will of every person. He also believed that a properly informed “mob,” such as that of the Revolution of 1688–89, might be the instrument through which a bad government could be removed. But if self-defense was his most essential principle, he did not believe it would ever lead to absolutism. The heroes and heroines of his fictions tend to rise, through their natural abilities, from dire poverty or extreme conditions to considerable wealth.


This essay explores what difference it makes that late seventeenth-century Japanese prose fiction, including the work of Ihara Saikaku, was far more frequently and extensively illustrated than its European counterparts. Part of the explanation for this may simply be economic and technological, but a more interesting answer lies in Japanese books' commitment to a far more visual (and often far less moralized) aesthetic, one that encourages a surprised and delighted savoring of the world (a stance intriguingly modeled for us, both visually and textually, by a passing woodcutter in Saikaku's Kōshoku gonin onna [Five Women Who Loved Love]). This intensely visual aesthetic, in turn, solicits a rather different kind of narrative engagement than that invited by most European fiction of the period: one far less interested in individuals qua individuals, far less obsessed with interiority, and far more willing to acknowledge the place that pleasure can and ought to have in our lives. All of which is to say that Saikaku's work and other ukiyo-zōshi [books of the floating world] can usefully contribute to the ongoing project of provincializing Europe (and the equally urgent project in literary studies of provincializing Defoe and perhaps the Anglophone novel more generally).


In recent years the academic study of literature has been riven by debates over the merits of “critique” (and near synonyms like “strong theory” and “hermeneutics”). In most of these debates, the only imaginable alternatives to the ostensibly destructive and “suspicious” practices of critique have been various forms of “weak” (i.e., descriptive, contextualizing, or affective) theory. In this essay we argue that: a) the dichotomy presented by advocates of “critique” and “postcritique” is a false one, and b) there is an ambitious and complex species of theory native to the eighteenth century that stands outside this dichotomy altogether. We trace the origins of this “native” theory in the work of a series of authors from Locke, to Dryden and Behn, to Addison, Fielding, and Johnson, to (ultimately) Wollstonecraft and Wordsworth. We argue that this native theory is an outgrowth of period thinking about contracts and (especially) liberalism. Although this theoretical tradition was extinguished, primarily by the “hermeneutic turn” of the early nineteenth century, before it could be fully articulated, we argue that it points to an ethical mode of reading that may be vital to the survival of the discipline today.


This brief response to the other contributions in this cluster highlights their implications for thinking across disciplines and for thinking about the vexed category of peace.




The author explains how Rand was absolutely correct in saying that Aristotle "stated the formula" of the Law of Identity. He corrects long-standing faulty Thomist criticisms on this issue and gives due credit to thinkers such as Antonius Andreas, Leibniz, and William Hamilton. The author further contends that the gradual shift in Objectivist usage of the Law of Identity (from "a thing is itself" to "a thing is what it is") tacitly ratifies these erroneous criticisms and has actually contributed to the failure of Objectivist thinkers to develop Rand's concept theory into a valid model of propositions and syllogisms.


This article engages the work of John Dewey to outline a pragmatist philosophy of communication that is adaptive to the undemocratic effects of extreme partisanship in belief and argument. Using his aesthetic theory, I sketch out an account of the phenomenological motions of communicative experience of self among others. I then examine the ways that partisan habits of thinking can warp our communicative activities. Drawing upon Dewey’s writings on logic and ethics, I examine his account of the habits of intelligent communication. Building on this ideal, I propose “sympathy” as both a feeling and a cognitive method to decrease the pull of distorting partisan habits of reasoning in communicative situations. Linking mindful receptivity to conversational others and an explicit method of charity becomes a viable way to instill true communicative respect in democratic communicators.


Shot through with Schlegel’s insight that “words often understand themselves better than those who use them, ” Walter’s Benjamin’s 1916 essay, “On Language as Such and on the Language of Man” extends an invitation to reflect on those words that speak to the recognizability of language, the name of that in which language abides and discloses itself. For now, a century after it was first composed as an unsent letter, a close consideration of Benjamin’s important essay sheds light on the contemporary question of recognition, the not yet rhetorical question of how the ethical-political stakes of recognition may hinge on the (dis)possession of (its) language.


In this article, I begin by examining critically the Socratic claim that the unexamined life is not worth living. I identify three clusters of problems with this claim. I then consider the consequences of these problems by contemplating a different view of the relation of self-knowledge to the good life. For purposes of illustration, I draw on the film version of the well-known novel Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil. In particular, I consider the significance and the limits of a central idea in this film—the notion of an overpaint (literally a painting that has been painted over) and the claim that not knowing what is beneath the overpaint can be enjoyable. I develop this idea with reference to the philosophies of William James and Gilles Deleuze and conclude by describing the ways in which this view reorients the practice of philosophy from wisdom (sophia) to practical intelligence (freeness).